[SYCL][Doc] Add overview of kernel-program caching (#2514)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/KernelProgramCache.md

  });
  Q.submit([&](handler &CGH) {
    ...

    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel_3>(
        range<2>{N_3, M_3}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
  ...
  Q.submit([&](handler &CGH) {
    ...

    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel_K>(
        range<2>{N_K, M_K}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
```

Both these use-cases will need to built the program or kernel multiple times.
When JIT is employed this process may take quite a lot of time.

In order to eliminate this waste of run-time we introduce a kernel/program
caching. The cache is per-context and it caches underlying objects of non
interop kernels and programs which are built with no options.

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here we use the term "program" in the same
sense as OpenCL does i.e. a set of kernels.

## Data structure of cache

The cache stores underlying PI objects of `cl::sycl::program` and
`cl::sycl::kernel` in a per-context data storage. The storage consists of two
maps: one is for programs and the other is for kernels.

Programs mapping's key consists of three components:
kernel set id<sup>[1](#what-is-ksid)</sup>, specialized constants, device this
program is built for.

> Kernels mapping's key consists of three components too: program the kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The kernel map's key consists of three components too: program the kernel
```

belongs to, kernel name<sup>[2](#what-is-kname)</sup>, device the program is
built for.

<a name="what-is-ksid">1</a>: Kernel set id is merely a number of translation

> unit which contains at least one kernel.

Reviewer: I think this is inaccurate. It is a rather a ordinal number of the device binary image the kernel is contained in. Kernels from multiple TUs may end-up in the same binary image.

> <a name="what-is-kname">2</a>: Kernel name is mangled class name which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a name="what-is-kname">2</a>: Kernel name is a mangled kernel ID class' name which is
```

provided to methods of `cl::sycl::handler` (e.g. `parallel_for` or
`single_task`).

## Points of improvement (things to do)

 - Implement LRU policy on cached objects. See [issue](https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues/2517).
 - Allow for caching of objects built with some build options.
 - Employ the same built object for multiple devices of the same ISA,
   capabilities and so on. *NOTE:* It's not really known if it's possible to
   check if two distinct devices are *exactly* the same.
 - Improve testing: cover real use-cases. See currently covered cases [here](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/unittests/kernel-and-program/Cache.cpp).

## Implementation details

The caches are represented with instance of [`KernelProgramCache`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/source/detail/kernel_program_cache.hpp)

> class. The class is instantiated in a per-context manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class. The runtime creates on instance of the class per distinct SYCL context. (A context object which is a result of copying another context object is not "distinct", as it corresponds to the same underlying internal object representing a context.)
```

> The `KernelProgramCache` is the storage descrived above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `KernelProgramCache` is essentially a pair of maps as described above.
```

### When does the cache come at work?

> The cache is employed when one submits kernel for execution or builds program or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cache is used when one submits a kernel for execution or builds a program or
```

> kernel with SYCL API. That means that the cache works when either user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with SYCL API. That means that the cache works when either user
```

explicitly calls `program::build_with_kernel_type<>()`/`program::get_kernel<>()`

> methods or SYCL RT builds or gets the required kernel. Cacheability of an object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
methods or SYCL RT builds a program or gets the required kernel as needed during application execution. Cacheability of an object
```

> is verified with `program_impl::is_cacheable()` method. SYCL RT will check if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be tested with `program_impl::is_cacheable()` method. SYCL RT will check if
```

> program is cacheable and will get the kernel with call to
> `ProgramManager::getOrCreateKernel()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only try to insert cacheable programs or kernels into the cache. This is done as a part of `ProgramManager::getOrCreateKernel()` method.
```

*NOTE:* a kernel is only cacheable if and only if the program it belongs to is
cacheable. On the other hand if the program is cacheable, then each and every
kernel of this program will be cached also.

> Invoked by user `program::build_with_kernel_type<>()` and
> `program::get_kernel<>()` methods will call either
> `ProgramManager::getBuildPIProgram()` or `ProgramManager::getOrCreateKernel()`
> method respectively. Now, both these methods will call template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All requests to build a program or to create a kernel - whether they originate from explicit user API calls or from internal SYCL runtime execution logic - end up with calling the
```

function [`getOrBuild()`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/source/detail/program_manager/program_manager.cpp#L149)

> with multiple lambdas passed to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with a number of lambda functions passed as arguments:
```

 - Acquire function;
 - GetCache function;
 - Build function.

*Acquire* function returns a locked version of cache. Locking is employed for
thread safety. The threads are blocked only for insert-or-acquire attempt, i.e.
when calling to `map::insert` in [`getOrBuild`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/source/detail/program_manager/program_manager.cpp#L149)
function. The rest of operation is done with the help of atomics and condition
variables (plus a mutex for proper work of condition variable).

*GetCache* function returns a reference to mapping `key->value` out of locked
instance of cache. We will see rationale behind it a bit later.

*Build* function actually builds the kernel or program.

Caching isn't done:

>  - when program is built out of source i.e. with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - when program is built out of source with
```

   `program::build_with_source()` or `program::compile_with_source()` method;

>  - when program is result of linking of multiple programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - when the program is a result of linking multiple programs.
```

perform the rest of build/wait process without unwanted need of other threads to
wait on lock availability.

A specialization of helper class [Locked](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/locked.hpp)
for reference of proper mapping is returned by Acquire function. The use of this
class implements RAII to make code look cleaner a bit. Now, GetCache function
will return the mapping to be employed i.e. it'll fetch mapping of kernel name
plus device to `BuildResult` for proper program as `getOrBuild` will work with
mapping of key (whichever it is) to `BuildResult` specialization. The structure
is specialized with either `PiKernel` or `PiProgram`<sup>[1](#remove-program)</sup>.

### Core of caching mechanism

Now, how `getOrBuild` works?
First, we fetch the cache with sequential calls to Acquire and GetCache
functions. Then, we check if we're the first ones who build this kernel/program.
This is achieved with attempt to insert another key-value pair into the map.
At this point we try to insert `BuildResult` stub instance with status equal to
"in progress" which will allow other threads to know that someone is (i.e.

> we're) building the object (i.e. kernel or program) now. If insertion fails we

Reviewer 2: If insertion fails, we

will wait for building thread to finish with call to `waitUntilBuilt` function.
This function will throw stored exception<sup>[2](#exception-data)</sup> upon

> build failure. This allows waiting threads to result the same as the building

Reviewer 2: This allows waiting threads to see the same result as the building thread.

Author: Fixed.

thread. Special case of the failure is when build result doesn't contain the
error (i.e. the error wasn't of `cl::sycl::exception` type) and the pointer to
object in `BuildResult` instance is nil. In this case the building thread has
finished build process and returned the user an error. Though, this error could

> be of spurious/sporadic nature. Hence, the waiting thread will try to build the

Reviewer 2: In this case, the building thread has finished the build process and has returned an error to the user. But this error may be sporadic in nature and may be spurious. Hence, the waiting thread will

Author: Fixed.

same object once more.

`BuildResult` structure also contains synchronization objects: mutex and
condition variable. We employ them to signal waiting threads that the build
process for this kernl/program is finished (either successfuly or with a
failure).

> <a name="remove-pointer">1</a>: The use of `std::remove_pointer` was omitted in

Reviewer 2: was omitted for the sake of simplicity here.

kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache

The cache stores underlying PI objects behind `cl::sycl::program` and
`cl::sycl::kernel` user-levelobjects in a per-context data storage. The storage
consists of two maps: one is for programs and the other is for kernels.

The programs map's key consists of three components: kernel set id<sup>[1](#what-is-ksid)</sup>,
specialized constants, device this program is built for.

The krnels map's key consists of three components too: program the kernel
belongs to, kernel name<sup>[2](#what-is-kname)</sup>, device the program is
built for.

<a name="what-is-ksid">1</a>: Kernel set id is an ordinal number of the device
binary image the kernel is contained in.

<a name="what-is-kname">2</a>: Kernel name is a kernel ID mangled class' name
which is provided to methods of `cl::sycl::handler` (e.g. `parallel_for` or
`single_task`).

## Points of improvement (things to do)

 - Implement LRU policy on cached objects. See [issue](https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues/2517).
 - Allow for caching of objects built with some build options.
 - Employ the same built object for multiple devices of the same ISA,

>    capabilities and so on. *NOTE:* It's not really known if it's possible to

Reviewer 3: I believe, this cannot be done in the SYCL RT because underlying APIs do not support such a thing.
It should be improved inside these implementations of these APIs instead.

Author: Noted.

        range<2>{N_1, M_1}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
  Q.submit([&](handler &CGH) {
    ...

    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel_2>(
        range<2>{N_2, M_2}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
  Q.submit([&](handler &CGH) {
    ...

    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel_3>(
        range<2>{N_3, M_3}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
  ...
  Q.submit([&](handler &CGH) {
    ...

    CGH.parallel_for<class TheKernel_K>(
        range<2>{N_K, M_K}, [=](item<2> Item) { ... });
  });
```

In both cases SYCL runtime will need to build the program and kernels multiple
times, which may involve JIT compilation and take quite a lot of time.

In order to eliminate this waste of run-time we introduce a kernel and program
caching. The cache is per-context and it caches underlying objects of non
interop kernels and programs which are built with no options.

<a name="what-is-program">1</a>: Here "program" means an internal SYCL runtime
object corresponding to a SPIRV module or native binary defining a set of SYCL
kernels and/or device functions.

## Data structure of cache

The cache stores underlying PI objects behind `cl::sycl::program` and

> `cl::sycl::kernel` user-levelobjects in a per-context data storage. The storage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`cl::sycl::kernel` user-level objects in a per-context data storage. The storage
```

Author: Fixed.

*Build* function actually builds the kernel or program.

Caching isn't done:
 - when program is built out of source with `program::build_with_source()` or
   `program::compile_with_source()` method;
 - when program is a result of linking multiple programs.

### Thread-safety

Why do we need thread safety here? It is quite possible to have a use-case when
the `cl::sycl::context` is shared across multiple threads (e.g. via sharing a
queue). Possibility of enqueueing multiple cacheable kernels simultaneously
from multiple threads requires us to provide thread-safety for the caching
mechanisms.

It is worth of noting that we don't cache the PI resource (kernel or program)
by itself. Instead we augment the resource with the status of build process.
Hence, what is cached is a wrapper structure `BuildResult` which contains three
information fields - pointer to built resource, build error (if applicable) and
current build status (either of "in progress", "succeeded", "failed").

One can find definition of `BuildResult` template in [KernelProgramCache](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/source/detail/kernel_program_cache.hpp).

> Pointer to built resource and build result are both atomic variables. Atomicity
> of these variables allows one to hold lock on cache for quite a short time and
> perform the rest of build/wait process without forcing other threads to wait on
> lock availability.

Reviewer: I think it is not the atomicity of fields which allows that, but the synchronization approach 
used. In this strategy fields in the BuildResult are accessed from multiple threads, so they must be atomic to ensure proper memory fences and exclude visibility of partially written data.

```suggestion
The built resource access synchronization approach aims at minimizing the time any thread 
holds the global lock guarding the maps to improve performance. To achieve that, the global lock is acquired only for the duration of the global map access. Actual build of the program happens outside of the lock, so other threads can request or build other programs in the meantime. A thread requesting a `BuildResult` instance via `getOrBuild` can go one of three ways:
A) Build result is **not** available, it is the first thread to request it. Current thread will then execute the build letting others wait for the result using the per-build result condition variable kept in `BuildResult`'s `MBuildCV` field.
B) Build result is **not** available, another thread is already building the result. Current thread will then wait for the result using the `MBuildCV` condition variable.
C) Build result **is** available. The thread simply takes it from the `Ptr` field w/o using any mutexes or condition variables.
As noted before, access to `BuildResult` instance fields may occur from different threads simultaneously, but the global lock is no longer held. So, to make it safe and to make sure only one thread builds the requested program, the following is done:
- program build state is reflected in the `State` field, threads use compare-and-swap technique to compete who will do the build and become thread A. Threads C will find 'DONE' in this field and immediately return the with built result at hand.
- thread A and thread(s) B use the `MBuildCV` conditional variable field and `MBuildResultMutex`  mutex field guarding that variable to implement the "single producer-multiple consumers scheme". 
- the build result itself appears in the 'Ptr' field when available.
All fields are atomic because they can accessed from multiple threads.
```

Author: Good point. Changed.

A specialization of helper class [Locked](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/locked.hpp)
for reference of proper mapping is returned by Acquire function. The use of this
class implements RAII to make code look cleaner a bit. Now, GetCache function
will return the mapping to be employed that includes the 3 components: kernel
name, device as well as any specialization constants. These get added to
`BuildResult` and are cached. The `BuildResult` structure is specialized with

> either `PiKernel` or `PiProgram`<sup>[1](#remove-program)</sup>.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
either `PiKernel` or `PiProgram`<sup>[1](#remove-pointer)</sup>.
```

Author: Fixed.

# A brief overview of kernel/program caching mechanism.

> The cache is employed when one submits kernel for execution or builds program or

Reviewer: I find it quite hard to follow the narration, frankly. Can we somewhat restruct the text?
Intro
  - what caches SYCL runtime implements (what is cached)
  - why (performance? why low performance w/o caches)
  - cache key and cache value (conceptually, w/o synchronization details at this point)
  - when caching happens, when cached value is used
  - mention as TODO that there is no eviction (https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues/2517)
  - why synchronization is needed
Details
  - details on when caching is skipped, when it is done.
  - overall synchronization scheme - what resource is guarded, what algorithm and primitives are used,
    what is sync primitive-to-resource correspondence (1-1, 1-many).
 - would be good to gave a picture with threads, cache elements and sync primitives

Author: I believe the readability of the document is improved now.
